##Tutorial 2: Data Processing with Pig - Processing Baseball Stats With Pig

**This tutorial is from the [Hortonworks Sandbox 2.0](http://hortonworks.com/products/sandbox) - a single-node Hadoop cluster running in a virtual machine. [Download](http://hortonworks.com/products/sandbox) the Hortonworks Sandbox to run this and other tutorials in the series.**

This tutorial was derived from one of the lab problems in the
Hortonworks Developer training class. The developer training class
covers uses of the tools in the Hortonworks Data Platform and how to
develop applications and projects using the Hortonworks Data Platform.
You can find more information about the course at [Hadoop Training for
Developers](http://hortonworks.com/hadoop-training/register-for-hadoop-training/)

### Hortonworks Hadoop Essentials Video

[Apache Pig (running time: about 12
minutes)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQb9I-8986s)

### What is Pig?

Pig is a high level scripting language that is used with Apache Hadoop.
Pig excels at describing data analysis problems as data flows. Pig is
complete in that you can do all the required data manipulations in
Apache Hadoop with Pig. In addition through the User Defined
Functions(UDF) facility in Pig you can have Pig invoke code in many
languages like JRuby, Jython and Java. Conversely you can embed Pig
scripts in other languages. The result is that you can use Pig as a
component to build larger and more complex applications that tackle real
business problems.

A good example of a Pig application is the ETL transaction model that
describes how a process will extract data from a source, transform it
according to a rule set and then load it into a datastore. Pig can
ingest data from files, streams or other sources using the User Defined
Functions(UDF). Once it has the data it can perform select, iteration,
and other transforms over the data. Again the UDF feature allows passing
the data to more complex algorithms for the transform. Finally Pig can
store the results into the Hadoop Data File System.

Pig scripts are translated into a series of MapReduce jobs that are run
on the Apache Hadoop cluster. As part of the translation the Pig
interpreter does perform optimizations to speed execution on Apache
Hadoop. We are going to write a Pig script that will do our data
analysis task.

### Our data processing task

We are going to read in a baseball statistics file. We are going to
compute the highest runs by a player for each year. This file has all
the statistics from 1871-2011 and it contains over 90,000 rows. Once we
have the highest runs we will extend the script to translate a player id
field into the first and last names of the players.

### Downloading the data

The data file we are using comes from the site www.seanlahman.com. You
can download the data file in csv zip form from:

[http://s3.amazonaws.com/hw-sandbox/tutorial2/lahman591-csv.zip](http://s3.amazonaws.com/hw-sandbox/tutorial2/lahman591-csv.zip)

Once you have the file you will need to unzip the file into a directory.
We will be uploading just the master.csv and batting.csv files.

### Uploading the data files

We start by selecting the File Browser from the top tool bar. The File
Browser allows us to view the Hortonworks Data Platform(HDP) file store.
This is separate from the local file system. In a Hadoop cluster this
would be your view of the Hadoop Data File System(HDFS). For the
Hortonworks Sandbox it will be part of the file system in the
Hortonworks Sandbox VM.

![File Browser](./images/tutorial-2/1FileBrowser.jpg?raw=true)

Click on the Upload button to select the files we want to upload into
the Hortonworks Sandbox environment.

![Upload Button](./images/tutorial-2/2UploadButton.jpg?raw=true)

You want to select Files. Then you will get a dialog box.

![Upload Box](./images/tutorial-2/3UploadBox.jpg?raw=true)

When you click on the Upload a file button you will get a dialog box.
Navigate to where you stored the Batting.csv file on your local disk and
select Batting.csv. Do the same thing for Master.csv. When you are done
you will see there are two files in your directory.

![Loaded Files](./images/tutorial-2/4LoadedFiles.jpg?raw=true)

Now that we have our data files we can start writing our Pig script.
Click on the Pig icon at the top of the screen.

![Pig Icon](./images/tutorial-2/5PigIcon.jpg?raw=true)

We see the Pig user interface in our browser window. On the left is a
list of the saved scripts. On the right is the composition area where we
will be writing our script. Below the composition area are buttons to
Save, Execute, Explain and perform a Syntax check of the current script.
At the very bottom are status boxes where we will see logs, error
message and the output of our script.

![Pig UI](./images/tutorial-2/6PigUI.jpg?raw=true)

To get started fill in a name for your script. You can not save it until
we add our first line of code. The first thing we need to do is load the
data. We use the load statement for this. The PigStorage function is
what does the loading and we pass it a comma as the data delimiter. Our
code is:

`batting = load 'Batting.csv' using PigStorage(',');` ![Load
Statement](./images/tutorial-2/7LoadStmt.jpg?raw=true)

The next thing we want to do is name the fields. We will use a FOREACH
statement to iterate through the batting data object. We can use Pig
Helper that is at the bottom of the composition area to provide us with
a template. We will click on Pig Helper, select Data processing
functions and then click on the FOREACH template. We can then replace
each element by hitting the tab key.

![Pig Helper Foreach](./images/tutorial-2/8PigHelperForeach.jpg?raw=true)

So the FOREACH statement will iterate through the batting data object
and GENERATE pulls out selected fields and assigns them names. The new
data object we are creating is then named runs. Our code will now be:

`runs = FOREACH batting GENERATE $0 as playerID, $1 as year, $8 as runs;`
![Foreach Statement](./images/tutorial-2/9ForeachStmt.jpg?raw=true)

The next line of code is a group statement that groups the elements in
runs by the year field. So the grp_data object will then be indexed by
year. In the next statement as we iterate through grp_data we will go
through year by year. Type in the code:

`grp_data = GROUP runs by (year);` ![Group
By](./images/tutorial-2/10GroupBy.jpg?raw=true)

In the next FOREACH statement we are going to find the maximum runs for
each year. The code for this is:

`max_runs = FOREACH grp_data GENERATE group as grp,MAX(runs.runs) as max_runs;`
![Foreach Max](./images/tutorial-2/11ForeachMax.jpg?raw=true)

Now that we have the maximum runs we need to join this with the runs
data object so we can pick up the player id. The result will be a
dataset with Year, PlayerID and Max Run. At the end we dump the data to
the output.

`join_max_run = JOIN max_runs by ($0, max_runs), runs by (year,runs); join_data = FOREACH join_max_run GENERATE $0 as year, $2 as playerID, $1 as runs; dump join_data;`
![Join](./images/tutorial-2/12Join.jpg?raw=true)

Let's take a look at our script. The first thing to notice is we never
really address single rows of data to the left of the equals sign and on
the right we just describe what we want to do for each row. We just
assume things are applied to all the rows. We also have powerful
operators like GROUP and JOIN to sort rows by a key and to build new
data objects.

At this point we can save our script. Fill in a name in the box below
"Pig script:" if you haven't already. Click on the save button and the
your script will show up in the bar on the left.
![SaveScript](./images/tutorial-2/13aSaveScript.jpg?raw=true)

We can execute our code by clicking on the execute button at the bottom
of the composition area. As the jobs are run you will get a progress bar
at the bottom.

![Progress Bar](./images/tutorial-2/13ProgressBar.jpg?raw=true)

When the job completes the results are displaying in the green box at
the bottom.

![Results](./images/tutorial-2/14Results.jpg?raw=true)

If you scroll down to the "Logs..." and click on the link you can see
the log file of your jobs.

![Logs](./images/tutorial-2/15Logs.jpg?raw=true)

So we have created a simple Pig script that reads in some comma
separated data. Once we have that set of records in Pig we pull out the
playerID, year and runs fields from each row. We them sort them by year
with one statement, GROUP. Then for each year we find the maximum runs.
This is finally mapped to the playerID and we produce our final dataset.

As mentioned before Pig operates on data flows. We consider each group
of rows together and we specify how we operate on them as a group. As
the datasets get larger and/or add fields our Pig script will remain
pretty much the same because it is concentrating on how we want to
manipulate the data.

**Feedback**

We are eager to hear your feedback on this tutorial. Please let us know
what you think. [Click
here](https://www.surveymonkey.com/s/Tutorial2PigBBall) to take survey
